(EN) We can find a metal detector at airports, theaters and various other public places. They are used for the safety of people to detect anyone carrying a metal.  In this project I am  going to design a simple metal detector circuit. There are so many metal detector designs but most of them are complex in design so here I am going to design a simple metal detector circuit using 555 Timer IC. In this circuit if the inductance value changes the value of reactance or impedance changes. The 555 IC timer here acts as a square wave generator and it generate pulses with frequencies audible to human. The capacitor between pin2 and pin1 should not be changed as it is need to generate audible frequencies. In this circuit you can see RLC circuit. RLC circuit is the metal detection part here. When a metal piece is brought near the coil, the metal piece acts as a core for the air cored inductor. By this metal acting as a core, the inductance of the coil changes or increases considerably. With this sudden increase in inductance of coil the overall reactance or impedance of the RLC circuit changes by a considerable amount when compared without the metal piece. At first when there is no metal piece the signal fed to speaker causes some audible sound. Now with the reactance change around the RLC circuit the signal sent to speaker will no longer be the same as before, because of this the sound produced by the speaker will be of different to the first one.  So whenever a metal is brought near the coil, the impedance of RLC changes making the signal to change resulting in variation to sound generated in speaker.  
Enamel should be removed at the tips of coil for soldering connections.
With different gauge we will have different RLC impedance, so one should experiment with resistance in RLC circuit for sensitive metal detection.

(DE) Wir können Metalldetektoren an Flughäfen, in Theatern und an verschiedenen anderen öffentlichen Orten finden. Sie werden zur Sicherheit der Menschen eingesetzt, um Personen mit Metallgegenständen zu erkennen. 

